Yichun (Chinese: 宜春; pinyin: Yíchūn; Wade–Giles: I2-ch'un1; postal: Ichun) is a mountainous prefecture-level city in western/northwestern Jiangxi Province, China, bordering Hunan to the west. Yichun literally means "pleasant spring". It is located in the northwest of the province along a river surrounded by mountains. Yichun has a history of over 2,200 years. It was established in 201 BC during the Han Dynasty. Yichun has a profound Buddhist culture. "Can Lin Qing Gui", the monastic rules for Buddhists at the Buddhist temple, originated from Yichun. Yichun is also the birthplace of many famous literary figures, such as Tao Yuanming and Deng Gu, both of whom are great poets from ancient times.
The transportation in Yichun is convenient. The State Highway 320, State Highway 105, the Shanghai-Ruijin Highway and the Ganyue Highway (the Jiangxi-Guangdong Highway) construct a comprehensive traffic network in the city. Yichun is a stop along the major railway running between Beijing and Nanchang, the capital of Jiangxi. Since 2014, it is also a stop along the Shanghai-Changsha CRH high speed train line, located between Changsha, the capital of Hunan and Nanchang, the capital of Jiangxi stops. Direct flights to Yichun airport are also available from Shanghai.
A large sports complex with two stadiums was built in the 1990s and draws teams for sports competitions from all across China. Agriculture is the main industry but other natural resource industries such as timber and mining are extremely important for the economy. Major mineral deposits include aluminum, tungsten, gold, zinc, and copper.
Yichun has abundant historical, cultural and natural tourism resources. Hongzhou Kiln, a famous kiln of the Tang Dynasty, was first built during the Southern Dynasty (AD420-589). Wucheng Site of the Shang Dynasty was discovered in Yichun in 1973. Gezhao Mountain, situated in Zhangshu, is a famous Taoist mountain in China. It is home to a large number of ancient buildings as well as beautiful scenery. Tourists should also visit Guan Mountain Scenic Area, which is located at the juncture of Yifeng and Tonggu counties. The famous Mingyue(moon) Mountain gained its name from its shape like a bright crescent moon. Mingyue Shan can be accessed using the cable car taking to the top of the mountain. The scenic area consists of over ten peaks which are all more than a thousand meters (about 3,281 feet) above sea level. It is also a national forest park comprising six tourist zones. Among them, the Yangshan Scenic Spot is an important birthplace of Buddhism in South China, and the Wentang Town, at the foot of the Mingyue Mountain, is famous for hot springs teeming with selenium.


== Geography and climate ==
Yichun spans 27°33′−29°06′ N latitude and 113°54′−116°27′ E longitude, bordering Nanchang, the provincial capital, and Fuzhou to the east, Ji'an and Xinyu to the south, Pingxiang to the southwest, Changsha and Yueyang (both in Hunan) to the northwest, and Jiujiang to the north.
Yichun has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cfa) affected by the East Asian monsoon, with long, humid, very hot summers (albeit slightly cooler than much of the rest of the province) and cool and drier winters with occasional cold snaps. The monthly 24-hour average temperature ranges from 5.4 °C (41.7 °F) in January to 28.3 °C (82.9 °F) in July, with an annual mean of 17.23 °C (63.0 °F). The average annual precipitation is 1,630 mm (64 in). Winter begins somewhat sunny and dry but becomes progressively wetter and cloudier; spring begins especially gloomy, and from April to June each of the months averages more than 210 mm (8.3 in) of rainfall. After the heavy rains subside in June, summer is especially sunny. Autumn is warm and relatively dry.


== Administration ==
Yichun has 1 district, 3 county-level cities, and 6 counties under its direct jurisdiction.
District
Yuanzhou
County-level cities
Zhangshu
Fengcheng
Gao'an
Counties
Jing'an County
Fengxin County
Shanggao County
Yifeng County
Tonggu County
Wanzai County


== External links ==
Official Website (Chinese)