Ghatanji is a very old city and municipal council in Yavatmal district in the state of Maharashtra, India. It is also known as 'Cotton City', because in this area farmer produces fine quality of cottons. It is also a place of pilgrimage of 'Brahmalin Shree Sant Maroti Maharaj' having Devasthan near the bank of river 'Waghadi'. Every year, in the month of January–February, a fair in the name of 'Brahmalin Shree Sant Maroti Maharaj' takes place at the 'Azad Maidan'. The day on which 'Dahi Handi' is being celebrated, is the main occasion in one month fair.
Ghatanji is a composition of name 'Ghati' and 'Anji', nearby suburbs, and is one of the main towns in Yavatmal District. There is a historical temple of 'Lord Nrusimha' (also called 'Lord Narsimha'), which was built in 'Hemadpanthi' architectural style. People from all the corners of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and other nearby states come here to pay homage."


== Geography ==
There is ample water resource due to river 'Waghadi' and Dam over there. It is having ample forest area, consisting Teak Wood, Nilgiri Trees and many other spices trees. Various types of animals are living in these jungles.


== Education, business and industries ==
Ghatanji has several educational institutes having facilities ranging from nursery education in both English and Marathi Languages up to Graduation in Arts, Commerce and Science. Ghatanji is privileged to have 'Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya', being only such school in the Yavatmal district situated at Belora village. There is a college of I.T.I., having fabulous building. There are also several Information Technology Institutes. It is to be mentioned that, many faces from the city have excelled and some are excelling in their respective fields, few names to list are Late Shri. Sahadeoji Bharti; first Member of Parliament from the Yavatmal constituency, Shri. Sadashivraoji Thakre; former Member of Parliament from the Yavatmal constituency etc. Ali Bhai Gilani, who donated major contribution to the formation of SPM gilani college in Ghatanji. Mr Puroshottam das Rungtha who took initiative in forming the SPM high school from which many gems emerged in the form of bright students who later on became famous nationally and Internationally.Mr Om Aaggarwal, CA. Vyanktesh Jaiswal, Mr Divakar Chaoudhary and Famous Pathologist Now in saudiarabia Dr Iqbal Musani are all the products of SPM High school Ghatanji
It is a big market place for the nearby towns and villages. Being 'Cotton City', it has a well established Agriculture Produce Market Committee i.e. 'APMC'. Cotton is the main produce in agriculture. Agriculture is the primary way and source of living-hood. There are many Ginning and Pressing Factories located in the city and nearby. One of the oldest factory is 'Birla Cotsyn (India) Limited' popularly known as 'Jamod Ginning'.


== Demographics ==
As of 2001 India census, Ghatanji had a population of 19,347. Males constitute 52% of the population and females 48%. Ghatanji has an average literacy rate of 74%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 80%, and female literacy is 68%. In Ghatanji, 12% of the population is under 6 years of age.


== References ==