Yajuar is the biggest village in Muzaffarpur district of Bihar in India and the second largest village in Bihar.


== Geography and climate ==
The Yajuar region is situated in the district of Muzaffarpur in Bihar, India. It is 55 km from Muzaffarpur. The village is lacking all infra facilities. During rainy season, it is very hard to reach.people have to travel around 100km to reach his home from the district. No electricity supplies available for the village and completely depend upon Kerosene oil and Lantern.
The climate is mainly dry and cool. In summer the temperature varies within the 35 to 45-degree Celsius range and in winter it is typically 5 to 15 degrees Celsius. The elevation is close to mean sea level. The soil is suited for agriculture, which is the main economic activity. Rainfall is sufficient for agriculture.


== Gram Panchayat and population ==
There are three Panchayats in Yajuar, namely Yajuar East, yajuar Middle and yajuar west village. As per the Census 2001 of India, total population of Yajuar including all three Panchayat is 40000. Yajuar East is biggest with total population of 24,152 persons followed by Jajuar West with 7,847 persons and Jajuar Middle with 7,817 persons.


== Language and culture ==
Since Yajuar is a part of Mithilanchal and urdu languags by Maithils, people generally speak Maithili. Also people are very traditional. All the Indian values are part of the lifestyle here. All the major festivals of India are celebrated here with full enthusiasm.
The original name Yajuar comes from Yajuwar that is "Yajur vedasaya agara yasya Yajuara" means village of people who know Yajuarveda one of the Veda. Due to locally use of wrong name and mistake by local government official, its revenue name is Jajuāra. Some time people called it as Jajuar.urdu secand languags


== Religious places and Festivals ==
There are so many spiritual places in Yajuar. The most important is PANCHVATI ASHTHAN,in the bank of SHIV GANGA KALIGHAT.This place is also in one of the best neet nd clean in another than temple place.here is 4 temple 1.bholenath,2.hanuman mandir,3.radhe krishna,nd 4.santoshi maa.Badi pokhra where the God of the village Shri Dihbad Baba's temple is situated under the Peepal tree. Several other temples are also situated on the bank of the Pokhar. Some of other important religious places in the village are Bhagvati Sthan,Devnagar (near gudri bazar bhira),Dhelmara Gosai, and Chaupadi Mahadev sthan, Hanuman Mandir in Panchove Tota near High School. Devi Shakti peeth "Chamunda Mata mandir" is situated in Katra (block office) which is at the distance of 8 km from Yajuar.
Yajuar celebrates a vast variety of festivals such as Holi, Diwali, Durga Puja, Ganesh Chaturthi, Chaurchan, Kojagra, Bhaiya Dooj or better known as "bhardutiya" among others. The Chhath Puja of yajuar is very famous among all the nearby villages. Kali puja is also celebrated in yajuar. In Durga Puja as well as Kaali Puja, a group of people commonly known as orchestra are invited by the Committee members to entertain the people by their dancing and singing acts. Durga puja is celebrated in the premises of the bari pokhra temple while kali puja is celebrated in harijan school. A large number of people from the village as well as from the nearby village like sambhuta, chainpur, ratbaar, jhaura, anguaa visit the bari pokhra premises during the celebration of durga puja. Chhath Puja is celebrated wholeheartedly by all the people of the village. On the day of भोरका अर्घ the residents of the village woke up as early as 2:30 am and reach the ghats by 4:00 am only.
Almost all the hindu festivals are celebrated in yajuar with great peace and harmony.


== Agriculture ==
Agriculture is the main economic activity of the region. The main crops are rice, wheat, pulses, moong, urad, arhar, jute (with a recent decline in its production), and maize.
Apart from these, Yajuar also has a vast variety of fruits, prominently mangoes. Although, mango trees can be found in the whole village, there's a special place called "jhaura" where a variety of mango trees can be found. As estimated, there are more than 20000 mango trees in jhaura.
The economy is not robust and the region is considered one of the poorest in India. Flooding destroys enormous amounts of crop every year. Due to absence of industry, a weak educational infrastructure and criminal politics, the majority of the area's youth have had to relocate for education and earnings.